 **Nature of business**

-          Give products or services to customers

o   Satisfy somebody’s needs or wants

o   NGOs

o   Often to make profit

![Diagram
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image002.png)

i.e. dog walking

capital: not much

enterprise:

land:

labour: (maybe run business but hire people) but dog walking you do yourself

Processes

Human resources: employees

Finance: how you pay for gas

Marketing: give out fliers to promote dog walking

Operations management:

Outputs:

Goods/servicing: walking dog

-          Lots of businesses come out of wars (i.e. NGOs)

 **Functions of a business**

1.       Human resources

2.       Finances

3.       Operations management

4.       Marketing

1.1   Reading Notes

Businesses are systems: systems are interconnected parts that work together to function and achieve a purpose

Systems have inputs, processes, outputs¸ and feedback

![Diagram
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image004.png)

Inputs: what you need to create the product

-          Physical, financial, and human. Financial resources can include medium/long-term financing (borrowing money)

-          “Enterprise is the process of taking risks to combine the other resources to create a good or service.”

-          ![Graphical user interface, text, application
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image006.png)

**Processes:** how you combine your inputs in different ways to produce a product

HR management: makes sure employees are happy and correct skill to produce products. Deal with laws and stuff

Finance and accounting: making sure the business doesn’t go bankrupt in the future

Marketing: making sure that the business is selling “the right product, at the right price, at the right time, to the right customers.”

Operations: all businesses have a core activity (i.e. making shoes). Operations make sure the core activity is done to the correct quantity and presumably quality too.

**Outputs**

You can either make goods (i.e. cookies) or services (i.e. healthcare)

 **Feedback**

**­**output of a system becomes the input of the same system (i.e. product reviews are used to improve the product). Two types of feedback looks: positive and negative. Positive reinforces the process – so you keep on doing the same thing. Negative feedback loop changes the process – so you do something differently.

**Sectors of businesses**

 Primary sector: involved in extraction, harvesting, conversion of natural resources

-          i.e. farming, mining, extraction of raw materials

Secondary: manufacturing or construction

Tertiary sector: provides services to the general public (i.e. car dealerships who sell the car, Netflix, Disney+, barber, Pizza Pizza)

Quaternary sector: knowledge based activities that generate/share information. “Intellectual, knowledge-based activities that generate and share information”

Stack: a business which has primary, secondary, etc. sectors. But it’s expensive to have all three – instead you can outsource different people who can do the job better

i.e. making bread. Primary: making wheat. Secondary: making/baking the bread. Tertiary: Longos/NoFrills selling the product

 **The chain of production**

Links all the production sectors

Extraction -> manufacturing, -> services -> consumers

Value is added to item as it moves through each sector

![Diagram
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image008.png)

 **Entrepreneurship**

-          an entrepreneur is someone who plans and organizes a business

-          Common challenges with new businesses

Opportunities for starting a business: use the mnemonic GET CASH

![Graphical user interface
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image010.png)

**Growth**

-          Reward for entrepreneur: capital growth

-          “Appreciation in the value of the assets of the business (e.g. land and buildings)

-          Capital growth yay – make more money than owner’s salary

**Earnings:** you can make more money since you are your own boss

**Transference and Inheritance:** entrepreneurs pass on their business to the next generation

**Autonomy:** entrepreneurs can do what they want and decide how they work

**Security:**  self employed has more job security. Potentially easier to increase personal wealth and financial security for retirement.

**1.2**   **Types of Business Entities**

-          Covers HRM, finance, marketing and operations management.

Distinction between private and public sectors

_Private sector:_ businesses owned and operated by private people. Usually their aim is to make profit

-          Operate independent of government but within rules/regulations of countries

![Text
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image012.png)

_Public sector:_ controlled by government (regional or national). These companies provide essential goods and services to the public. They can (not always though) directly charge customers for services.

-          Infrastructure, housing, health care, education, national defence, emergency services

![Text
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image014.png)

**Types of for-profit organizations**

_Solar trader:_ commercial for-profit business that is owned by a single person. The sole trader can have many employees but is the only owner of the business

Advantages of sole traders/sole proprietors

-          Quick and easy to set up.

-          Owner gets all the profit.

-          Sole traders are highly motivated owners

-          Complete control of business decisions

-          Quick decision making – no need to consult others

-          Privacy à tax records only go to tax authorities and not the public

-          Tax benefits

Disadvantages

-          Start up costs must come from sole trader

-          Risky business

-          High workload

-          Unincorporated business – unlimited liability and responsible for any debt owed to other individuals

-          Business is screwed if owner is sick, goes on business or retires

-          Small business, can’t get economy of scale

![Graphical user interface, text, Word
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image016.png)

a)       A sole trader is someone who is the only owner of a for profit business.

b)      An advantage is that Cam does not have to conform to a schedule, so she can take time to raise her children as necessary. Disadvantage: since she runs the business, she has no backup if the business does poorly – so it cost her a lot during the coronavirus pandemic.

_Partnership_

-          Owned by two or more people.

-          Mostly unicorporated businesses – at least one of the company owners has unlimited liability

-          Sign the **Deed of Partnership**

o   States responsibility, voting rights, and how profit will be shared

Advantages

-          Can raise more finance than sole traders. Silent partners can provide extra capital

-          More ideas and different skills

-          Shared workload

-          Continuity – one can go on vacation

-          Specialization and division of labour.

o   “For example, a law firm might have partners who specialize in different specialisms, such as criminal law, civil law, business law and tax law.”

-          Only tax authorities need to know about money stuff

Disadvantages

-          Disagreements

-          Slow decision making

-          Profit must be shared.

-          Unlimited liability

-          Can raise finance through shareholder.

-          What happens of a partner leaves the business or passes away

_Privately Held Companies_

-          Commercial for-profit businesses owned by shareholders.

![Text
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image018.png)

_Features of privately held companies_      

-          Shares cannot be advertised nor sold on stock exchange. Not available on the New York Stock Exchange

-          Shares typically held by family, relatives, and friends

-          Limited amount of shareholders. Some countries have a maximum

-          No legal requirement to publish financial accounts (usually). Only needed for corporate tax

_Advantages_

-          Control. Shares in privately held company cannot be bought or sold

-          LOTS of start up finance

-          Privacy compared to public companies

-          Limited liability: usually cannot lose more than what they invest

-          Enjoy continuity in the event “of the death of a major shareholder”

_Disadvantages_

-          Can only sell shares with approval of other shareholders. Buying/selling shares in this type of company is difficult

-          More expensive to operate

-          Can be target of takeover by a larger company

_Publicly Held Companies_

-          Also known as joint stock. Owned by shareholders but shares can be bought by the general public without approval of existing owners

-          Shares can be bought through the stock exchange

-          Sells its shares to become publically held. Puts in initial public offer IPO via stock exchange

-          Publically held companies are regulated and publish financial accounts each year

-          No limit on number of share holders

Advantages

-          Additional finance: easy to obtain finance from stock exchange to fund growth

-          Easy to borrow money

-          Enjoy limited liability

-          Operates at large scale (economies of scale, market share, market power)

-          Enjoy continuity

Disadvantages:

-          Lack of privacy – public can see finances

-          Difficult and expensive to set up and run

-          Potential threat rival company will make a takeover bid ??

-          Diseconomies of scale. Being to large can be inefficient -> higher average costs of production

-          ![Graphical user interface, application
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image020.png)

**For profit  s**

![Chart, diagram
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image022.png)

Goal: make money and help people

-          They exist o create a better world

-          SPOs (social purpose organization) include charaties, cooperatives, and non-governmental organizations

-          An organization that meets social objectives and not only creating max profit or max shareholder returns

-          Businesses may do donations, but they’re primary goal is to still make money (they can’t donate money they don’t have)

Cooperatives

-          Owners of

![Graphical user interface, application
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image024.png)

![Graphical user interface
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image026.png)

![A screenshot of a computer
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image028.png)

-          Social purpose organizations is an umbrella term that includes charities and social enterprises

-          In IB you’ll see FOR PROFIT SOCIAL ENTERPRISES (Private sector companies, public sector companies, cooperatives)

-          NON PROFIT SOCIAL ENTERPRISES: NGOs

-          In social enterprises, profit comes as a result of social and environmental goals.

-          TIP: social enterprises need profit to survive. Charities rely on donations.

-          Public sector social enterprises: i.e. electricity. Use the profit to improve life of everyone

o   Often times through partnership with private sector

Advantages of public sector companies

-          Fewer risks: product of company

-          Can charge for services, so less money taxpayers need to pay

-          Employ a lot af people

Limitations

-          Limited budget, government has to choose which sector to fund

-          Expensive to operate. Unpredictable rates of return.

-          Difficult to persuade PPP (private company partnerships)

-          Slow decision making (it’s the government so yeah)

Cooperatives:

-          Owners of cooperatives are called members

-          Members are not necessarily share holders (don’t invest money to make start the business ?)

-          Coops exist mostly in farm industry

Advantages of cooperatives

-          Incentives to work

-          Dicision making power

-          Social benefits

-          Public support

Disadvantages

-          Disincentive

-          Finance

-          Slow decision making

![Graphical user interface, application
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image030.png)

TODO finish cooperatives

**Non profit social enterprises**

-          NGOs need profit to reinvest back into the company

-          NGOs work in non profit way and don’t distribute money to owners or shareholders. Instead, they invest back into their business

_Advantages_

-          Non profit exist to serve the public. Rewarding job for employee

-          Don’t have to pay taxes

-          Many NPOs qualify for government money

_Disadvantages_

-          Strict guidelines and restrictions. Not all trading is permitted (to make sure public isn’t getting scammed)

-          Depends on goodwill of general population. Smaller NGOs can die out easily

-          Lack of financial and cost control since owners don’t get money

-          Lower working wages. No bonuses

**NGOs**

-          Non profit social enterprise that exists in the private sector

-          Not government run

-          Can be funded by:

![Graphical user interface, text, application, email
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image032.png)

![Text
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image034.png)

![Table
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image036.png)

**1.1**   **True or false**

**![Graphical user interface, text, application
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image038.png)**

**![Graphical user interface, text, application
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image040.png)![Graphical user interface, text, application, email
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image042.png)**

**![Graphical user interface, text, application, email
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image044.png)![Table
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image046.png)**

**![Graphical user interface, text, application, email
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image048.png)**

**1.3**   **Business Objectives**

-          Strategies businesses use to achieve their purpose

**Vision and Mission Statements**

_Vision statement_: a declaration of what a company strives to be, or wants to achieve in the distant future.

**Mission statement:** “succinct and motivating declaration of an organization’s core purpose” à why they exist, and what they do. Typically remains unchanged

Vision statement is broad, mission statement is specific

-          Vision and mission statements are meant for business stakeholders and employees. It guides them with a purpose and direction

-          Motivates employees, especially if the company values align with the employee values

![Text
Description automatically generated with medium confidence](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image050.png)

Vision statements are important for businesses to have the motivation (because they know what they are working towards)

![Text
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image052.png) 

Mission statement

![Text
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image054.png)

**Problems with vision/mission statements**

-          Company doesn’t actually follow them!!!

-          Done only to make the company look good

-          Long term and may never actually happen (especially with vision terms)

Distinguish between a vision statement and a mission statement

               A mission statement is a declaration of the purpose and beliefs of a company. A mission statement serves as the day-to-day motivation for employees and stakeholders. A vision statement is the long-term goals of a company. It is what the company wishes to become or achieve. The difference between a vision statement and a mission statement is that a vision statement is meant to be long-term – the goal a company can achieve some day. A mission statement, however, is meant to be achieved every day – the people in a business strive to fulfill the company’s mission statement every day.

**Common Business Objectives**

“Unless you dream, you’re not going to achieve anything” ~ Sir Richard Branson

-          Business objectives are “clearly defined and measurable targets of an organization”

o   Used to achieve their overall goals (i.e. mission and vision)

-          Important for businesses so employees know what they are working towards

-          Often based on the SMART acronym

-          **S**pecific **M**easurable **A**greed **R**ealistic **T**ime specific

o   i.e. “to achieve sales of $10 million in European markets by 2023”

![Graphical user interface, text, application
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image056.png)

**Business Objectives**

1.       Growth

-          Increase in the size of a business

-          Benefits

o   Higher sales revenue and profit (buy more bulk material, and sell more)

o   Economies of scale (buy more at a discounted price)

o   Reduced risk (big corporations are able less vulnerable to recessions)

Internal growth: organization expands without external help (such as a partner). Uses its own finances and resources to grow

External growth: people put money into your business so you grow

_How to measure growth_

1.       Sales revenue 

2.       Sales volume (how much you sell)

3.       Profit (financial surplus)

4.       Customers

5.       Number of employees

6.       Market share

![Chart, line chart
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image058.png)

**PROFIT**

-          Incentive for business owners to take risks (because reward is money)

-          Internal source of finance to invest in expanding your business EMPIRE.

-          It’s what keeps in motivated and IN THE BUSINESS

**PROTECTING SHAREHOLDER VALUE**

-          “CEO is responsible for protecting shareholder value”

-          Companies are owned by shareholders.

-          “Protecting shareholder value” means to keep shareholders interestd in the company

-          Responsibility of the CEO and board of directors

![Text
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image060.png)

**ETHICAL OBJECTIVES**

-          Being nice in business operations

-          Workers are paid fairly, no exploitation, do nothing mean, don’t damage the environment

-          Disadvantages:

o   Compliance costs (i.e. buying organic rather than GMO produce)

o   Higher prices (being nice is costly to businesses)

o   Lower profits (it’s cheaper to burn coal)

o   Subjectivity (ambiguity in what is considered ethical)

o   Stakeholder conflict (some stakeholder only care about money, not the environment or people, so they are less likely to invest in your business)

Define the term _ethical objectives_

An ethical objective is a clearly stated target of a business that is

**STRATEGIC AND TACTICAL OBJECTIVES**

-          Strategic objective: long term goal that the business strives to achieve. Used to achieve a strategic/mission/vision of business.

-          Requires more financial and human investment than tactical objectives

-          Strategic objectives can include growth, profit maximization, protecting shareholder value, or ethical objectives

-          Tactical objective: short term or specific goals of a business. Has definite timelines and tactical objectives are delegated to lower downs in an organizational hierarchy.

Strategies

-          The actions that a business plans to do to reach long term organizational aims or corporate-wide objectives

-          Strategies are decided by senior leaders or the board of directors

Tactics

-          Short term approaches to achieving an objective

-          Used by organization to meet specific and measurable goals

![A screenshot of a computer
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image062.png)

Using relevant examples, distinguish between _tactical objectives_ and _strategic objectives_.   _[4 marks]_

Tactical objectives are the short-term goals of a business. Typically, tactical objectives are set and carried out by lower downs in the hierarchy of business leadership. Since tactical objectives are short-term, they typically are within a time frame of less than a year. An example of a tactical objective could be to improve labour productivity or to reduce operational waste. A strategic objective is a long term task of a business. In contrast to tactical objectives which are managed and set by lower downs, a strategic objective is initiated by the board of directors or leaders of a business. An example of a strategic objective could be profit maximization or protecting shareholder value.  

**Corporate social responsibility**

-          The value, decisions, and actions that business makes that impact society in a good way.

-          Moral obligation to stakeholder (difference between stakeholder and shareholder)

-          i.e. giving discounts to teachers

-          Can be costly

-          ![Text
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image064.png)

-          High production costs which may make stakeholders upset

![Text
Description automatically generated](file:///C:/Users/Pranav/AppData/Local/Temp/msohtmlclip1/01/clip_image066.png)

TRIPLE BOTTOM LINE: ecological, social, and economic sustainability